Glossary
--------

.. index:: algorithm

algorithm
   A general process for solving a category of problems.

.. index:: argument

argument
   A value provided to a function when the function is called. This
   value is assigned to the corresponding parameter in the function.

.. index:: body

body
   The sequence of statements inside a function definition.

.. index:: composition

composition
   Using an expression as part of a larger expression, or a statement as
   part of a larger statement.

.. index:: deterministic

deterministic
   Pertaining to a program that does the same thing each time it runs,
   given the same inputs.

.. index:: dot notation

dot notation
   The syntax for calling a function in another module by specifying the
   module name followed by a dot (period) and the function name.

.. index:: flow of execution

flow of execution
   The order in which statements are executed during a program run.

.. index:: fruitful function

fruitful function
   A function that returns a value.

.. index:: function

function
   A named sequence of statements that performs some useful operation.
   Functions may or may not take arguments and may or may not produce a
   result.

.. index:: function call

function call
   A statement that executes a function. It consists of the function
   name followed by an argument list.

.. index:: function definition

function definition
   A statement that creates a new function, specifying its name,
   parameters, and the statements it executes.

.. index:: function definition

function object
   A value created by a function definition. The name of the function is
   a variable that refers to a function object.

.. index:: header

header
   The first line of a function definition.

.. index:: import statement
.. index:: statement; import

import statement
   A statement that reads a module file and creates a module object.

.. index:: module

module object
   A value created by an ``import`` statement that provides access to
   the data and code defined in a module.

.. index:: parameter

parameter
   A name used inside a function to refer to the value passed as an
   argument.

.. index:: pseudorandom

pseudorandom
   Pertaining to a sequence of numbers that appear to be random, but are
   generated by a deterministic program.

.. index:: return value

return value
   The result of a function. If a function call is used as an
   expression, the return value is the value of the expression.

.. index:: void function

void function
   A function that does not return a value.

